Massive Refactor (#179)
ietf-wg-scitt/draft-ietf-scitt-architecture: draft-ietf-scitt-architecture.md

{::boilerplate bcp14-tagged}

# Terminology {#terminology}

The terms defined in this section have special meaning in the context of Supply Chain Integrity, Transparency, and Trust, which are used throughout this document.
When used in text, the corresponding terms are capitalized.
To ensure readability, only a core set of terms is included in this section.

> The label "394" is expected to be reserved by this document, in the COSE Header Parameters Registry.

Reviewer: yes, good for now. but you are correct

> Please remove this comment before publishing.

Reviewer 2: Why is this in the terminology?

Author: its a description of the CBOR labels we use in examples, which are "requested" and are not actually assigned.

> Please remove this comment before publishing.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
NOTE: Please remove this comment before publishing.
```

{::boilerplate bcp14-tagged}

> # Use Cases

Reviewer 3: fore reviewers, this is a move, not an edit or deletion

Author: its a move, under the definition of transparency

Registration Policy:

: the pre-condition enforced by the Transparency Service before registering a Signed Statement, based on information in the non-opaque header and metadata contained in its COSE Envelope.
A Transparency Service MAY implement any range of policies that meets their needs.

> However a Transparency Service can not alter the contents of the Signed Statements.

Reviewer 2: Has it been relocated elsewhere in the document?

Reviewer 3: Yes, below

Transparency Service:

: an entity that maintains and extends the Append-only Log, and endorses its state.

> A Transparency Service MAY alter the contents of the unprotected header of Signed Statements, this will alter the binary content stored on the log, from which receipts are produced.

Reviewer 2: Does it mean that unprotected headers are now also included in the receipt's signed information? This significantly complicates the interpretation of the resulting receipts by verifiers. I also don't think it should be discussed in the terminology.

Author: They have always been included, this is just making that explicit.

Reviewer 3: Editors meeting note: please open a PR/Issue if needed.

> A Transparency Service MAY alter the contents of the unprotected header of Signed Statements, this will alter the binary content stored on the log, from which receipts are produced.

Reviewer 4: I am not clear about this statement! Yes, Transparency Service alters the Unprotected Header of Signed Statements by inserting Receipts, however Receipts are not stored in the log?

Author: as a general rule, you never know if anyone has altered an unprotected header... thats what unprotected means.

we do know that a "receipt" will be for whatever "bytes" "go into the log"... in many cases, that means just hashing, and then constructing a list of hashes (for RFC9162)... the details for this are described in the choice of verifiable data structure.

Reviewer: No, that is not correct. TS produce receipts and not Transparent Statements

> A Transparency Service MAY alter the contents of the unprotected header of Signed Statements, this will alter the binary content stored on the log, from which receipts are produced.

Reviewer 4: @OR13 : See if you like this text: We can merge this?

> A Transparency Service MAY alter the contents of the unprotected header of Signed Statements, this will alter the binary content stored on the log, from which receipts are produced.

Author: I filed https://github.com/ietf-wg-scitt/draft-ietf-scitt-architecture/issues/183

I am declining to apply this suggestion, lets discuss on issues first.

> A Transparency Service MAY alter the contents of the unprotected header of Signed Statements, this will alter the binary content stored on the log, from which receipts are produced.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
```

Receipts do not expire, but it is possible to append new entries (more recent Signed Statements) that subsume older entries (less recent Signed Statements).

Anyone with access to the Transparency Service can independently verify its consistency and review the complete list of Transparent Statements registered by each Issuer.

> However, the Registrations on a separate Transparency Service is generally disjoint, though it is possible to take a Transparent Statement(i.e. a Signed Statement with a Receipt in its unprotected header, from a from the first Transparency Service ) and register it on another Transparency Service, where the second receipt will be over the first Receipt in the unprotected header.

Reviewer 4: Raise a new issue

Reputable Issuers are thus incentivized to carefully review their Statements before signing them to produce Signed Statements.
Similarly, reputable Transparency Services are incentivized to secure their Append-only Log, as any inconsistency can easily be pinpointed by any Auditor with read access to the Transparency Service.

The building blocks defined in SCITT are intended to support applications in any supply chain that produces or relies upon digital artifacts, from the build and supply of software and IoT devices to advanced manufacturing and food supply.

SCITT is a generalization of Certificate Transparency {{-CT}}, which can be interpreted as a transparency architecture for the supply chain of X.509 certificates.
Considering CT in terms of SCITT:

- CAs (Issuers) sign X.509 TBSCertificates (Artifacts) to produce X.509 certificates (Signed Statements)
- CAs submit the certificates to one or more CT logs (Transparency Services)
- CT logs produce Signed Certificate Timestamps (Transparent Statements)

> - SCTs are checked by browsers (Verifiers)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- SCTs are checked by Verifiers
```

Receipts do not expire, but it is possible to append new entries (more recent Signed Statements) that subsume older entries (less recent Signed Statements).

Anyone with access to the Transparency Service can independently verify its consistency and review the complete list of Transparent Statements registered by each Issuer.

> However, the Registrations on separate Transparency Services are generally disjoint, though it is possible to take a Transparent Statement, a Signed Statement with a Receipt from the first Transparency Service in its unprotected header, and register it on another Transparency Service, where the second receipt will be over the first Receipt in the unprotected header.

Reviewer 2: This is new, and unclear to me. I guess the receipt should be on the on transparent statement registered at the first service (including its first receipt as untrusted header) not just on the first receipt. As discussed above, this complicates the interpretation of receipts by verifiers and auditors.

Reviewer 3: Editors meeting note:
Transparent statements are a result of the "client" stapling the receipt to their local copy of the signed statement.
A client can resubmit the signed statement, with the receipt in the unprotected header.

> However, the Registrations on separate Transparency Services are generally disjoint, though it is possible to take a Transparent Statement, a Signed Statement with a Receipt from the first Transparency Service in its unprotected header, and register it on another Transparency Service, where the second receipt will be over the first Receipt in the unprotected header.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
However, the Registrations on a separate Transparency Service is generally disjoint, though it is possible to take a Transparent Statement(i.e. a Signed Statement with a Receipt in its unprotected header, from a from the first Transparency Service ) and register it on another Transparency Service, where the second receipt will be over the first Receipt in the unprotected header.
```

However, the Registrations on separate Transparency Services are generally disjoint, though it is possible to take a Transparent Statement, a Signed Statement with a Receipt from the first Transparency Service in its unprotected header, and register it on another Transparency Service, where the second receipt will be over the first Receipt in the unprotected header.

Reputable Issuers are thus incentivized to carefully review their Statements before signing them to produce Signed Statements.
Similarly, reputable Transparency Services are incentivized to secure their Append-only Log, as any inconsistency can easily be pinpointed by any Auditor with read access to the Transparency Service.

> Some Append-only Log formats may also support consistency auditing ({{sec-consistency}}) through Receipts, that is, given two valid Receipts the Transparency Service may be asked to produce a cryptographic proof that they are consistent.

Reviewer 2: There are two conflicting views on auditing in this document: receipt-based vs log-based.

> Some Append-only Log formats may also support consistency auditing ({{sec-consistency}}) through Receipts, that is, given two valid Receipts the Transparency Service may be asked to produce a cryptographic proof that they are consistent.

Reviewer 3: Discussed in the editors meeting. Marking resolved as different implementations have different formats

> Failure to produce this proof can indicate that the Transparency Services operator misbehaved.

Reviewer 2: Why removing these two items?

Author: its a layer violation, the verifiable data structure controls these details, not SCITT.

> SCITT is a generalization of Certificate Transparency {{-CT}}, which can be interpreted as a transparency architecture for the supply chain of X.509 certificates.

Reviewer 2: I would rephrase to avoid claiming this is a generalization of CT

Author: I just moved the text from the top here, I am declining to make changes to this part in this PR.

Reviewer 3: Editors meeting note: please open an issue/PR if you'd like revisit.

## Transparency Service

An important function of a Transparency Service is to maintain Registration Policies for the Append-only Log.
The Append-only Log is the verifiable data structure which registers Signed Statements and supports the production of Receipts.

All Transparency Services MUST expose APIs for the registration of Signed Statements and issuance of Receipts.

Transparency Services MAY support additional APIs for auditing, for instance, to query the history of Signed Statements.

Typically a Transparency Services has a single Issuer identity which is present in the `iss` claim of Receipts for that service.

Multi-tenant support can be enabled through the use of identifiers in the `iss` claim, for example, `ts.example` may have a distinct Issuer identity for each sub domain, such as `customer1.ts.example` and `customer2.ts.example`.

### Initialization {#ts-initialization}

The Append-only Log is empty when the Transparency Service is initialized.

> The first entry that is added to the Append-only Log MUST be a Signed Statement including key material.

Reviewer 5: The restriction on the first entry doesn't make sense to me. Why are we being so specific about the log contents ?

The second set of entries are Signed Statements for additional domain-specific Registration Policy.

> The third set of entries are Signed Statements for Artifacts.

Reviewer 5: This seems way too prescriptive. We just wouldn't do it this way at all

### Registration Policies

Registration Policies refer to the checks that are performed before a Signed Statement is registered to an Append-only Log, and a corresponding Receipt becomes available.

As a minimum, a Transparency Service MUST authenticate the Issuer of Signed Statements, which requires a trust anchor in the form of an already registered Signed Statement including key material (see {{ts-initialization}}).
As defined in {{RFC6024}}, "A trust anchor represents an authoritative entity via a public key and associated data.
The public key is used to verify digital signatures, and the associated data is used to constrain the types of information for which the trust anchor is authoritative."
Typical representations of a trust anchor include certificates or raw public keys.

The `x5t` and `kid` Claims in the protected header of Signed Statements can be used as hints for discovering trust anchors.
Before a Registration Policy is used to decide if a Signed Statement is registered, the policy MUST be registered.
Before a Signed Statement is registered, the trust anchor used to verify it MUST be registered (e.g., via a registered Registration Policy).

> In order to register a trust anchor, the trust anchor MUST be converted to a Signed Statement with a matching content type Claim.

Reviewer 5: Overly specifying initialization precedures can introduce operational compexities. Isn't it enough to solve the boot straping problem, by just having a null registration policy with a use-once restriction ?

Specific verifiable data structures, such those describes in {{-CT}} and {{-COMETRE}} are out of scope for this document.

### Adjacent Services

Transparency Services can be deployed along side other database or object storage technologies.
For example, a Transparency Service that is supporting a software package management system, might be referenced from the APIs exposed for package management.
Providing an ability to request a fresh receipt for a given software package, or to request a list of Signed Statements and Artifacts associated with a software package.

## Signed Statements

This specification prioritizes conformance to {{RFC9052}} and its required and optional properties.
Profiles and implementation specific choices should be used to determine admissability of conforming messages.
This specification is left intentionally open to allow implementations to make the restrictions that make the most sense for their operational use cases.

At least one identifier for an identity document MUST be included in the protected header of the COSE envelope, either `x5t` or `kid`.

> - Support for `x5t` is mandatory to implement.

Reviewer 5: That x5t is mandatory and kid is optional is very frustrating. It would be more helpful if was just one or the other must be present

~~~ cddl
CWT_Claims = {
    1 => tstr            ; iss, the issuer making statements
    2 => tstr            ; sub, the subject of the statements
  * int => any
}

Protected_Header = {
    1 => int             ; algorithm identifier
    3 => tstr            ; payload type
  ? 4 => bstr            ; Key ID (kid)
   15 => CWT_Claims      ; CBOR Web Token Claims
   34 => COSE_CertHash   ; x5t, hash of an X.509 certificate
   * int => any
}
~~~
{: #fig-signed-statement title="CDDL definition for SCITT Signed Statements"}

### Support for Multiple Artifacts

Issuers may produce Signed Statements about different Artifacts under the same Identity.
Issuers and Verifiers must be able to recognize the Artifact to which the statements pertain by looking at the Signed Statement.
The `iss` and `sub` claims, within the CWT_Claims protected header, are used to identify the Artifact the statement pertains to.

See Subject under {{terminology}} Terminology.

Issuers MAY use different signing keys (identified by `kid` in the resolved key manifest) for different Artifacts, or sign all Signed Statements under the same key.

> ### Support for Multiple Statements

Reviewer 2: Where is the text that was above the CDDL?

> TODO: Remove this ^. It is a layer violation, and it mixes the concept of feed, into the function of the Transparency Service.

Reviewer 3: Without assuming what you're suggesting, can you elaborate: "layer violation"?

Author: its not clear what is "TS" and what is "SCITT API", querying history of signed statements might not be possible with "adjacent services" see https://github.com/ietf-wg-scitt/draft-ietf-scitt-architecture/issues/183

The Append-only Log is the verifiable data structure which registers Signed Statements and supports the production of Receipts.

All Transparency Services MUST expose APIs for the registration of Signed Statements and issuance of Receipts.

Transparency Services MAY support additional APIs for auditing, for instance, to query the history of Signed Statements.

Typically a Transparency Services has a single issuer identity which is present in the `iss` claim of Receipts for that service.

Multi-tenant support can be enabled through the use of identifiers in the `iss` claim, for example, `ts.example` may have a distinct issuer identity for each sub domain, such as `customer1.ts.example` and `customer2.ts.example`.

### Initialization {#ts-initialization}

The Append-only Log is empty when the Transparency Service is initialized.
The first entry that is added to the Append-only Log MUST be a Signed Statement including key material.
The second set of entries are Signed Statements for additional domain-specific Registration Policy.
The third set of entries are Signed Statements for Artifacts.

> From here on a Transparency Service is capable to check Signed Statements on registration via policy (that is at minimum key material and typically other Registration Policy) and is therefore in a reliable state to register Signed Statements about Artifacts or new Registration Policy.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
From here on a Transparency Service can check Signed Statements on registration via policy (that is at minimum key material and typically a Registration Policy) and is therefore in a reliable state to register Signed Statements about Artifacts or a new Registration Policy.
```

Transparency Services can be deployed along side other database or object storage technologies.
For example, a Transparency Service that is supporting a software package management system, might be referenced from the APIs exposed for package management.
Providing an ability to request a fresh receipt for a given software package, or to request a list of signed statements and artifacts associated with a software package.

## Signed Statements

This specification prioritizes conformance to RFC9052 and its required and optional properties.
Profiles and implementation specific choices should be used to determine admissability of conforming messages.
This specification is left intentionally open to allow implementatons to make the restrictions that make the most sense for their operational use cases.

At least one identifier for an identity document MUST be included in the protected header of the COSE envelope, either `x5t` or `kid`.

Support for `x5t` is mandatory to implement.

Support for `kid` is optional.

When `x5t` is present, `iss` MUST be a string with a value between 1 and 8192 characters in length that fits the regular expression of a distinguished name.

> TODO: address the guidance on choosing `iss` values for certificate based identities.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```
See #188

This section describes at a high level, the three main roles and associated processes in SCITT: Issuers and Signed Statements, Transparency Service and the Signed Statement Registration process, as well as Verifiers of the Transparent Statements and the Receipt validation process.

## Transparency Service

An important function of a Transparency Service is to maintain Registration Policies for the Append-only Log.
The Append-only Log is the verifiable data structure which registers Signed Statements and supports the production of Receipts.

All Transparency Services MUST expose APIs for the registration of Signed Statements and issuance of Receipts.

Transparency Services MAY support additional APIs for auditing, for instance, to query the history of Signed Statements.

> TODO: Remove this ^. It is a layer violation, and it mixes the concept of feed, into the function of the Transparency Service.

Reviewer 3: Removing the TODO, as the potential change can be tracked as a new issue/pr.
```suggestion
```

This section describes at a high level, the three main roles and associated processes in SCITT: Issuers and Signed Statements, Transparency Service and the Signed Statement Registration process, as well as Verifiers of the Transparent Statements and the Receipt validation process.

## Transparency Service

> The most important function of a Transparency Service is to maintain Registration Policies for the Append-only Log.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
An important function of a Transparency Service is to maintain Registration Policies for the Append-only Log.
```

The Append-only Log is the verifiable data structure which registers Signed Statements and supports the production of Receipts.

All Transparency Services MUST expose APIs for the registration of Signed Statements and issuance of Receipts.

Transparency Services MAY support additional APIs for auditing, for instance, to query the history of Signed Statements.
TODO: Remove this ^. It is a layer violation, and it mixes the concept of feed, into the function of the Transparency Service.

> Typically a Transparency Services has a single issuer identity which is present in the `iss` claim of Receipts for that service.

Reviewer: We can improve here, but "service key" was formerly introduced in English text as "a service key, which is used to endorse the state of the Append-only Log in Receipts". This language is less ambiguous and yes it allows also more freedom. This is certainly a topic we can pick up again on after version update.

Multitenant support can be enabled through the use of identifiers in the `iss` claim, for example, `ts.example` may have a distinct issuer identity for each sub domain, such as `customer1.ts.example` and `customer2.ts.example`.

### Initialization {#ts-initialization}

The Append-only Log is empty when the Transparency Service is initialized.
The first entry that is added to the Append-only Log MUST be a Signed Statement including key material.

> The second set of entries are Signed Statements for additional domain-specific Registration Policy.

Reviewer 2: This description of initialization is new, and seems overly prescriptive. The first entry seems recursive, and does not say what kind of key materials are involved. In my opinion (and as written before) signed statement that document registration policies can be interleaved with other records.

Author: The section just aggregates "policy" stuff that was spread all over the document.

Reviewer 2: I don't see that. The ordering constraints of entries in the log, and the exclusive focus on keys, seems fresh.

Reviewer 3: This was the outcome of IETF 118, to formalize the initialization. Please open a new PR/Issue for any proposed changes.

The third set of entries are Signed Statements for Artifacts.
From here on a Transparency Service is capable to check Signed Statements on registration via policy (that is at minimum key material and typically other Registration Policy) and is therefore in a reliable state to register Signed Statements about Artifacts or new Registration Policy.

### Registration Policies

Registration Policies refer to the checks that are performed before a Signed Statement is registered to an Append-only Log, and a corresponding Receipt becomes available.

> As a minimum, a Transparency Service MUST authenticate the Issuer of Signed Statements, which requires a trust anchor in the form of an already registered Signed Statement including key material (see {{ts-initialization}}).

Reviewer 2: Are we requesting a separate statement that registers the issuer key? Also, this does not match the new description in initialization above.

Author: Yes, the suggestion was that you cannot "verify signed statements", unless you have a key.

Reviewer 2: Sure, there are many other ways for verifiers to get the key (e.g. certs in untrusted headers); the reliance on a separate, earlier transparent statement is new, and arguably too specific.

Reviewer 3: Editors meeting note: Please open a new issue/pr for any suggestions.

This specification leaves the implementation of the Registration Policy to the provider of the Transparency Services and its users.

A provider of a Transparency Service indicates what Registration Policy is used in a given deployment and inform its users about changes to the Registration Policy by issuing and registering configuration statements.

As a minimum, a Transparency Service MUST authenticate the Issuer of the Signed Statement, which requires some form of trust anchor.
As a minimum, a Transparency Service MUST authenticate the Issuer of Signed Statements, which requires a trust anchor in the form of an already registered Signed Statement including key material (see {{ts-initialization}}).
As defined in {{RFC6024}}, "A trust anchor represents an authoritative entity via a public key and associated data.
The public key is used to verify digital signatures, and the associated data is used to constrain the types of information for which the trust anchor is authoritative."
The Trust Anchor may be a certificate, a raw public key or other structure, as appropriate.
It can be a non-root certificate when it is a certificate.

> ### Append-only Log Security Requirements

Reviewer 6: That is a lot of deleted text here, which against weakens the definition of a TS significantly. If your expectation is that anything that supports Merkle Tree proof of inclusion will meet these requirements, I don't think that is the case as the COMETRE ID doesn't have finality or consistency requirements to create new algorithms.

Reviewer: Or goes to the COMETRE I-D, of course. I forgot to mention that.

Typical representations of a trust anchor include certificates or raw public keys.

#### Consistency
The `x5t` and `kid` Claims in the protected header of Signed Statements can be used as hints for discovering trust anchors.
Before a Registration Policy is used to decide if a Signed Statement is registered, the policy MUST be registered.
Before a Signed Statement is registered, the trust anchor used to verify it MUST be registered (e.g., via a registered Registration Policy)..
In order to register a trust anchor, the trust anchor MUST be converted to a Signed Statement with a matching content type Claim.
During initialization of a Transparency Service, the first Signed Statements registered will be for a trust anchor that is not validated by any Registration Policy.

There is no fork in the Append-only Log.
Everyone with access to its contents sees the same sequence of entries, and can check its consistency with any Receipts they have collected.
Transparency Service implementations MAY provide a mechanism to verify that the state of the Append-only Log, encoded in an old Receipt, is consistent with the current Append-only Log state.

#### Replayability and Auditing

> 

Reviewer 2: Why cutting this subsection?

Reviewer 3: Editors meeting note: With all the MAYs, these are great implementation-specific capabilities. 
Please open an issue/PR with new suggestions.

> Specific verifiable data structures, such those describes in {{-CT}} and {{-COMETRE}} are out of scope for this document.

Reviewer 6: But at least their intended security properties are? If this is out of scope of SCITT then at least the COMETRE document must be much more specific about the minimum security properties of verifiable data structures.

Reviewer: Yes. That is a COMETRE task (or other Append-only Log specification text).

> When `x5t` is present, `iss` MUST be a string with a value between 1 and 8192 characters in length that fits the regular expression of a distinguished name.

Reviewer 6: Not clear what this means

Reviewer: This text was inherited and we can easily remove the `value between 1 and 8192 characters in length that fits the regular expression of a distinguished name` part. The important part is, that `iss` must be present when `x5` is present. We simply did not remove the per-existing value constraint. Can do that now or later.

Reviewer 3: See #188

> TODO: address the guidance on choosing `iss` values for certificate based identities.

Reviewer 6: That is a big TODO and since x5t is now mandatory it needs to be specified before this PR can be merged

Reviewer: I would prefer release early, release often, The note should move to an issue, though.

> A Receipt is a Signed Statement, with addition claims in its protected header related to verifying the inclusion proof in its unprotected header. See {{-COMETRE}}.

Reviewer 6: Doesn't make sense, rephrase?

Author: ```suggestion
A Receipt is a Signed Statement, (cose-sign1), with addition claims in its protected header related to verifying the inclusion proof in its unprotected header. See {{-COMETRE}}.
```

Author: @ad-l does this help?

>   payload     : bstr / nil,

Reviewer 4: I thought when a `Payload` is a `hash` it cannot be `nil` ?

Author: For a receipt, the verifiable data structure defines what this is... for RFC9162, the payload is "computed from the inclusion proof".

Multiple Issuers can make the same Statement about a single Artifact, affirming multiple Issuers agree.

## Transparency Service {#ts-duties}

The role of a Transparency Service includes several major functions.

> The most important function is to maintain Registration Policy for the Append-only Log that is the verifiable data structure recording Signed Statements.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The most important function is to maintain a Registration Policy for the Append-only Log which is a verifiable data structure recording of the Signed Statements.
```

All Transparency Services MUST expose APIs for Registration of Signed Statements and Receipt issuance.
Transparency Services MAY support additional APIs for auditing, for instance to query the history of Signed Statements.

### Initialization {#ts-initialization}

The Append-only Log is empty when the Transparency Service is initialized.
The first entry that is added to the Append-only Log MUST be a Signed Statement including key material.

> The second set of entries are Signed Statements for additional domain-specific Registration Policy.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The second set of entries are Signed Statements for an additional domain-specific Registration Policy.
```

Reviewer 3: There is a problem with the plurality of the sentence above. You have "Signed Statement**s**", yet you leave out "**a** Registration Policy", or Signed Statements for Registration Polic**ies**"

The third set of entries are Signed Statements for Artifacts.
From here on a Transparency Service is capable to check Signed Statements on registration via policy (that is at minimum key material and typically other Registration Policy) and is therefore in a reliable state to register Signed Statements about Artifacts or new Registration Policy.

### Transparency Service Identity and Authenticity

Every Transparency Service MUST have a public service identity that is associated with public/private key pairs for signing Receipts on behalf of the service.

> In particular, this service identity must be known by Verifiers when checking a Receipt's signature.

Reviewer 3: A note that the section marked for deletion here is captured later [here](https://github.com/ietf-wg-scitt/draft-ietf-scitt-architecture/pull/179/files#diff-585fb424519b79cf000445f3425fa56d328cbaca5d2a622740ddc4e5ca91dbe1R888)

Author: I was just moving security considerations to that section, I did not attempt to actually improve the security considerations.

A Transparency Service MAY provide additional authenticity assurances about its secure implementation and operation, enabling remote attestation of the hardware platforms and/or software Trusted Computing Bases (TCB) that run the Transparency Service.
If present, these additional authenticity assurances MUST be registered in the Append-only Log and MUST always be exposed by the Transparency Services' APIs.
An example of Signed Statement's payloads that can improve authenticity assurances are trustworthiness assessments that are RATS Conceptual Messages, such as Evidence, Endorsements, or corresponding Attestation Results (see {{-rats-arch}}).

> For example, if a Transparency Service is implemented using a set of redundant replicas, each running within its own hardware-protected trusted execution environments (TEEs), then each replica can provide fresh Evidence or fresh Attestation Results about its TEEs. The respective Evidence can show, for example, the binding of the hardware platform to the software that runs the Transparency Service, the long-term public key of the service, or the key used by the replica for signing Receipts. The respective Attestation Result, for example, can show that the remote attestation Evidence was appraised by a trusted Verifier and complies with well-known Reference Values and Endorsements.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For example, if a Transparency Service is implemented using a set of redundant replicas, each running within its own hardware-protected trusted execution environments (TEEs), then each replica can provide fresh Evidence or fresh Attestation Results about its TEEs.
The respective Evidence can show, for example, the binding of the hardware platform to the software that runs the Transparency Service, the long-term public key of the service, or the key used by the replica for signing Receipts.
The respective Attestation Result, for example, can show that the remote attestation Evidence was appraised by a trusted Verifier and complies with well-known Reference Values and Endorsements.
```

### Registration Policies

Registration Policies refer to the checks that are performed before a Signed Statement is registered to an Append-only Log, and a corresponding Receipt becomes available.

As a minimum, a Transparency Service MUST authenticate the Issuer of Signed Statements, which requires a trust anchor in the form of an already registered Signed Statement including key material (see {{ts-initialization}}).
As defined in {{RFC6024}}, "A trust anchor represents an authoritative entity via a public key and associated data.
The public key is used to verify digital signatures, and the associated data is used to constrain the types of information for which the trust anchor is authoritative."
Typical representations of a trust anchor include certificates or raw public keys.

The `x5t` and `kid` Claims in the protected header of Signed Statements can be used as hints for discovering trust anchors.
Before a Registration Policy is used to decide if a Signed Statement is registered, the policy MUST be registered.

> Before a Signed Statement is registered, the trust anchor used to verify it MUST be registered (e.g., via a registered Registration Policy)..

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Before a Signed Statement is registered, the trust anchor used to verify it MUST be registered (e.g., via a registered Registration Policy).
```

Reviewer 3: Did you mean to keep ".." at the end of the sentence?

In order to register a trust anchor, the trust anchor MUST be converted to a Signed Statement with a matching content type Claim.

> During initialization of a Transparency Service, the first Signed Statements registered will be for a trust anchor that is not validated by any Registration Policy.

Reviewer 3: Is this redundant with line [438](https://github.com/ietf-wg-scitt/draft-ietf-scitt-architecture/pull/179/files#diff-585fb424519b79cf000445f3425fa56d328cbaca5d2a622740ddc4e5ca91dbe1R438)

> The first entry that is added to the Append-only Log MUST be a Signed Statement including key material.

Author: Its not redundant, the referenced line is normative, this is informative.

This specification leaves implementation and encoding of Registration Policy to the operator of the Transparency Service.

### Transparency Log

The security properties of the Append-only Log are determined by the choice of the verifiable data structure used to produce receipts.

In addition to Receipts, some verifiable data structures might support additional proof types, such as proofs of consistency, or proofs of non inclusion.

Specific verifiable data structures, such those describes in {{-CT}} and {{-COMETRE}} are out of scope for this document.

#### Adjacent Services

> Transparency Services can be deployed along side other database or object storage technologies.

Reviewer 3: Minor nit:
```suggestion
Transparency Services can be deployed along side other data or object storage technologies.
```

> For example, a Transparency Service that is supporting a software package management system, might be referenced from the APIs exposed for package management. Providing an ability to request a fresh receipt for a given software package, or to request a list of signed statements and artifacts associated with a software package.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For example, a Transparency Service that is supporting a software package management system might be referenced from the APIs exposed for package management.
Providing an ability to request a fresh receipt for a given software package, or to request a list of signed statements and Artifacts associated with a software package.
```

1. **Register the Signed Statement** to the append-only log.
1. **Return the Receipt**, which MAY be asynchronous from registration.
Details about generating Receipts are described in {{Receipt}}.

The last two steps may be shared between a batch of Signed Statements recorded in the Append-only Log.

A Transparency Service MUST ensure that a Signed Statement is registered before releasing its Receipt, so that it can always back up the Receipt by releasing the corresponding entry (the now Transparent Statement) in the Append-only Log.
Conversely, the Transparency Service MAY re-issue Receipts for the Append-only Log content, for instance after a transient fault during Signed Statement registration.

## Transparent Statements {#Receipt}

The client (which is not necessarily the Issuer) that registers a Signed Statement and receives a Receipt can produce a Transparent Statement by adding the Receipt to the Unprotected Header of the Signed Statement.

When a Signed Statement is registered by a Transparency Service a Receipt becomes available.
When a Receipt is included in a Signed Statement a Transparent Statement is produced.

> Receipts are based on Signed Inclusion Proofs as described in COSE Signed Merkle Tree Proofs ({{-COMETRE}}).

Reviewer 5: How does a transparency service signal that it is using a proof format that is not currently registered  in the draft (ie not RFC9162_SHA256)

A Transparency Service MUST ensure that a Signed Statement is registered before releasing its Receipt, so that it can always back up the Receipt by releasing the corresponding entry (the now Transparent Statement) in the Append-only Log.
Conversely, the Transparency Service MAY re-issue Receipts for the Append-only Log content, for instance after a transient fault during Signed Statement registration.

## Transparent Statements {#Receipt}

> The client (which is not necessarily the issuer) that registers a Signed Statement and receives a Receipt can produce a Transparent Statment by adding the Receipt to the Unprotected header of the Signed Statement.

Reviewer 4: Discuss the possible issue on this issue!

Reviewer 3: See #189

  ]
]
~~~~
{: #fig-receipt-inclusion-proof-edn title="CBOR Extended Diagnostic Notation example of a Receipt's Inclusion Proof"}

This is a decoded inclusion proof for RFC9162_SHA256, other verifiable data structures might encode inclusion proofs differently.

> ### Validation {#validation}

Reviewer 4: Revisit ### Validation {#validation} section fully: After refactor

Reviewer 3: See #190

  ]
]
~~~~
{: #fig-receipt-inclusion-proof-edn title="CBOR Extended Diagnostic Notation example of a Receipt's Inclusion Proof"}

This is a decoded inclusion proof for RFC9162_SHA256, other verifiable data structures might encode inclusion proofs differently.

### Validation {#validation}

> Verifiers MUST apply the verification process as described in Section 4.4 of RFC9052.

Reviewer 6: The non-x5t case is now underspecified if we only cite RFC9052 validation

Issuers and Transparency Services MUST carefully protect their private signing keys and avoid these keys being used for any purpose not described in this architecture document.
In cases where key re-use is unavoidable, keys MUST NOT sign any other message that may be verified as an Envelope as part of a Signed Statement.

Each of these functions MUST be carefully protected against both external attacks and internal misbehavior by some or all of the operators of the Transparency Service.

For instance, the code for the Registration Policy evaluation and endorsement may be protected by running in a Trusted Execution Environment (TEE).

> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```
